React Query and management of server state (#108)
rootstrap/blog: content/React Query and management of server state - Nicolás Santos.md

# React Query and management of server state

> Some days ago the [React Summit Remote Edition](https://remote.reactsummit.com/) gathered tons of people behind the screen with the promise of putting together popular speakers around the React Community like [Kent C. Dodds](https://kentcdodds.com/) and [Guillermo Rauch](https://rauchg.com/) among others, but one talk especially caught my attention, *React Query: It’s Time to Break up with your "Global State”!* by [Tanner Linsley](https://twitter.com/tannerlinsley). In it, Tanner talked about two pain points that I had frequently with React, such as how to handle asynchronous information in the global state and how to restructure my code to be less repetitive and not force async data to follow synchronous flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some days ago the [React Summit Remote Edition](https://remote.reactsummit.com/) gathered tons of people behind the screen with the promise of putting together popular speakers around the React Community like [Kent C. Dodds](https://kentcdodds.com/) and [Guillermo Rauch](https://rauchg.com/) among others, but one talk especially caught my attention, *React Query: It’s Time to Break up with your "Global State”!* by [Tanner Linsley](https://twitter.com/tannerlinsley). In it, Tanner talked about two pain points that I had frequently with React, which were how to handle asynchronous information in the global state and how to restructure my code to be less repetitive and not force async data to follow synchronous flow.
```

> In this article, I explain in more detail which is the problem with the global state and how [React Query](https://github.com/tannerlinsley/react-query) solves it in an efficient-scalable way. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, I'll explain in more detail which is the problem with the global state and how [React Query](https://github.com/tannerlinsley/react-query) solves it in an efficient-scalable way. 
```

## The problem with global state

> Libraries like Redux, MobX and even Context API provided by React are based in the Global State pattern, which means that to avoid prop drilling between the components and have one single point to read and write from the components, the entire application exposes a global variable called _global state_.

Author: What do you think of re-writing it like this?
```
Libraries like Redux, MobX and even Context API provided by React are based in the Global State pattern, which means that to avoid prop drilling and sharing data between the components in different hierarchy levels, and have one single point to read and write from the components(making it easy to store data used across the app), the entire application exposes a global variable called _global state_.
```

> Libraries like Redux, MobX and even Context API provided by React are based in the Global State pattern, which means that to avoid prop drilling between the components and have one single point to read and write from the components, the entire application exposes a global variable called _global state_.

Reviewer 2: I like it. Can you update it?

> This pattern has many advantages, but the problem **lies in the different types of data that potentially have the global state in our applications**. These data can be internal information about our application, like for example if the navbar is open or not, or information that has ownership with another source, for instance, the user information like his name, age, etc, that is provided by backend and can be modified in the frontend. The above-mentioned two types of data can be classified as a **client state and server state**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pattern has many advantages, but the problem **lies in the different types of data that potentially has the global state in our applications**. These data can be internal information about our application, like for example if the navbar is open or not, or information that has ownership with another source, for instance, the user information like his name, age, etc, that is provided by backend and can be modified in the frontend. The two types of data mentioned above can be classified as a **client state and server state**.
```

> The main difference between each other is the server state has two sources of truth, the backend and the frontend. This causes that the server state has to synchronize all the time to prevent that it's information is not out of date. As we know, this is not performant at all and it wouldn't be a good practice to request information all the time(image putting a spinner every time you do a request) request information all the time, for that reason **we need some way to show the old information and at the same time update it with the new information on the background every so often**. This is a very difficult task if we try to do with Redux or the other tools that I mentioned before because we have to find a way to resolve cache management, background update and other cases that require a little bit more of implementation when merging old and new data such as pagination or infinite scroll.

Reviewer 3: `request information all the time` is duplicated, you might have missed it when making changes.

> The main difference between each other is the server state has two sources of truth, the backend and the frontend. This causes that the server state has to synchronize all the time to prevent that it's information is not out of date. As we know, this is not performant at all and it wouldn't be a good practice to request information all the time(image putting a spinner every time you do a request), for that reason **we need some way to show the old information and at the same time update it with the new information on the background every so often**. This is a very difficult task if we try to do with Redux or the other tools that I mentioned before because we have to find a way to resolve cache management, background update and other cases that require a little bit more of implementation when merging old and new data such as pagination or infinite scroll.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main difference between each is the server state has two sources of truth, the backend, and the frontend. This causes the server state to synchronize all the time to prevent that its information is not out of date. As we know, this is not performant at all and it wouldn't be a good practice to request information all the time(image putting a spinner every time you do a request), for that reason **we need some way to show the old information and at the same time update it with the new information on the background every so often**. This is a very difficult task if we try to do with Redux or the other tools that I mentioned before because we have to find a way to resolve cache management, background update and other cases that require a little bit more of implementation when merging old and new data such as pagination or infinite scroll.
```

- Inactive: React Query has a garbage collector for managing cache on the browser, this state in some manner indicates to React query that if the data is not being used in the application, it will potentially be deleted after a while. This is a great feature of React Query, because we want to persist the recent information to not fetching data all the time and improve the speed/UX of our interfaces.
- Deleted: This happens when the data was inactive for a certain period of time and it's deleted from the cache. This timeout can be configurable locally for each query or globally.

With this approach, React Query handles the asynchronous information of our application clearly, allowing us to scale and maintain our code in a better way.

## Introduction to React query API
Although React Query has only two hooks, it is highly configurable in all aspects, from the retry delay time of the queries to the set maximum time of inactive data in the cache.
But let's start with the most basic API that is well documented in [their repository](https://github.com/tannerlinsley/react-query)

https://gist.github.com/nsantos16/7f71e979ed3c884755906c9dbdee1436

> This hook provided us the status of the fetch (loading, error, or success), and data and error if they are defined. Up to this point is a pretty normal hook for fetching information, but as we see the query is related to a key (in this case `movies`), this is a unique-global key that is used for associate the query information between the components, in this way we can re-use this hook to use the same information in anywhere of the DOM tree. If you follow the classic redux action-reducer cycle for fetching data, **this hooks it will save up a lot of repetitive code**.

Reviewer 3: And here `**this hook will save up a lot of repetitive code**` singular and without the `it`

> This hook provided us the status of the fetch (loading, error, or success), and data and error if they are defined. Up to this point is a pretty normal hook for fetching information, but as we see the query is related to a key (in this case `movies`), this is a unique-global key that is used for associate the query information between the components, in this way we can re-use this hook to use the same information in anywhere of the DOM tree. If you follow the classic redux action-reducer cycle for fetching data, **this hooks will save up a lot of repetitive code**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This hook provided us the status of the fetch (loading, error, or success), and data and error if they are defined. Up to this point is a pretty normal hook for fetching information, but as we see the query is related to a key (in this case `movies`), this is a unique-global key that is used for associate the query information between the components, in this way we can re-use this hook to use the same information in anywhere of the DOM tree. If you follow the classic redux action-reducer cycle for fetching data, **these hooks will save up a lot of repetitive code**.
```

Among other things, React Query also allows us to filter the information with a simple system.

https://gist.github.com/nsantos16/99d85d896256be0006f3d55cab8c5595

And also, for contemplate the case that the client-side alter the server state React Query introduce the concept of **mutations**(well known for GraphQL developers), let's make a quick example

https://gist.github.com/nsantos16/3ac5eac3d607b89f2b11a56821390462

With `onSave` function we're re-fetching the information on the background while immediately change the specific information(in this case the new movie) in the user interface.

## Manage cached data
Saving data that we fetched and how we save it is an important aspect of our application, it improves the sensation of speed in our interfaces, and avoids hitting the backend all the time.
One of the more important aspects of React Query that sets it apart from other libraries like [SWR](https://github.com/zeit/swr) is the strategy and mechanism to manage the cache.

> For managing cache, there are a lot of alternatives and strategies we can adopt and in most of the cases it depends a lot on the problem we need to resolve it, but for general cases, and more particularly for frontend cases, like pagination, infinite scroll, or just showing information, [stale-while-revalidate](https://web.dev/stale-while-revalidate/) strategy is an excellent choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For managing cache, there are a lot of alternatives and strategies we can adopt, and in most cases, it depends a lot on the problem we need to resolve. For general cases, and more particularly for frontend cases, like pagination, infinite scroll, or just showing information, [stale-while-revalidate](https://web.dev/stale-while-revalidate/) strategy is an excellent choice.
```

> This strategy consists in, as the name says, revalidating the information(fetching) while the old data is shown to the user. Let's put an example to make it clearer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This strategy consists of, as the name says, revalidating the information (fetching) while the old data is shown to the user. Let's put an example to make it clearer
```

![Cache example](https://i.ibb.co/X3cPjBp/Screen-Shot-2020-05-14-at-17-20-38.png)
Back to the movies example, let's say I have a video streaming platform with home, explore and user settings pages, in the image above we can see a classic flow of requests in this kind of application, when:

>  1. The user enters on the platform at the home page, all the movies are requested (Loading spinner shown to the user)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 1. The user enters on the platform at the home page, all the movies are requested (Loading spinner is shown to the user)
```

 2. The user goes to explore page to see the catalog of movies divided by genre, then the movies that we requested before are showed while React Query revalidates on the background (Any loading spinner is shown to the user and the response is immediate)
 3. The user goes to the settings page, then React Query detects movie data are not used in the application so pass to the "inactive" state

>  4. Since 5 minutes(or the time that you configure on the query) passed, React Query removes the information from the cache

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 4. After 5 minutes (or the time that you configure on the query), React Query removes the information from the cache
```

## Final thoughts

> React Query is an excellent tool with an incredible API that revives the conversation around how and why we use synchronous patterns for asynchronous data and how this impacts the way we build our applications today.

Reviewer 2: The verb `revives` sounds weird to me haha.

```suggestion
React Query is an excellent tool with an incredible API that opens the conversation around how and why we use synchronous patterns for asynchronous data and how this impacts the way we build our applications today.
```
